Iran's foreign Ministry has called on
European countries to quote stand
against the war in Gaza the statement
comes after Iran dismissed calls from
France Germany and the UK to exercise
restraint amid warnings of an imminent
Iranian attack on Israel Iran blames
Israel for the killing of Hamas
political Chief in Teran last month the
United States recent deployment of
submarine and fighter jets to Israel is
being seen as a warning to Iran to stand
down on its
threat faas jgies is with me now he's a
professor of international relations at
the London School of Economics with a
focus on the Middle East welcome back to
DW Foos now is there any reason to
believe that Iran will not retaliate or
limit its retaliation take is that uh
Iran will most likely
retaliate uh for Israel's alleged
assassination
of Hamas top political leader is Hanah
in tahan Iranian officials have
repeatedly said that they have the right
under international law to respond uh to
the humiliation and the assassination of
Hamas political leader on their
territories but my reading is that the
Iranian leadership does not really want
all out war with Israel they are taking
their time they are trying to uh
calibrate their attack in a way that
does not really provide the Israeli
Prime Minister with a pretext for the
for escalation for further escalation so
to answer your question in in in a in
directly I think it will most likely be
measured and try to avoid civilian
casualties in Israel Iran's new
president masud pesan is considered more
moderate than his predecessor is there
or was there hope deescalation with this
new
government well I mean we know that the
new president the agenda his agenda is
very clear he wants to focus on the
economy he wants to open up Iranian
Society he want to restore relations
with the Western governments but
remember what happened on his during his
inauguration uh abas hania who was the I
mean guest of honor for the Iranian
leadership was killed during the
inauguration um it was really great
humiliation seen by the Iranian
leadership so what the Iranian
leadership is trying to do is to
basically that's what they say to try to
restore deterence try to prevent Israel
convince Israel not to really um take uh
further aggression and for the Iranian
president it was basically a a major
sabotage uh before even he uh formed his
own cabinet
uh but at the end of the day for your
own viewers the Iranian president does
not really make the final decision on
foreign policy and strategic matters
it's the supreme leader of Iran Ali
kamani who is the commander and chief
but based on what we know that the new
Iranian president is trying to limit
Iran's retaliation because in his talks
in his phone conversations with the
French President and the British prime
minister uh stama he made very clear
that the way to deescalate is to have a
ceasefire to end the blood luting in
Gaza and this is might give Iran a way
out to climb down from the tree now this
is what we have publicly uh been told
right that that there was a rebuttle of
the western nation's appeal for
restraint what do we know about backdoor
diplomacy efforts in in this
issue well I think this is a very
important question I I think uh what we
know what we do not know is more
important than what we know we know that
the United States and Iran are
communicating uh directly and indirectly
they have been doing so for quite you
know uh since the uh uh break out of the
war in Gaza we also know that European
governments whether Germany or France or
Britain are really trying to also uh
deescalate the crisis we know Qatar and
turkey and and Egypt and Jordan are also
playing a role but at the end of the day
Iranian leader have made it very clear
they cannot afford not to retaliate and
sadly to say as a student of
international relations that's what
states do the idea of prestige the idea
of deterence is very important but at
the end of the day it's been two weeks
now and the fact that Iran and Husalah
lebanon's have not retaliate it so far
it tells me they are trying very hard
that decision will be designed to
retaliate Without Really provoking and a
a further escalation between Israel and
the United States on the one hand and
Iran and its local allies on the other
hand that was far was jurus from the
London School of Economics thank you so
much great to get your
insights thanks now Iran has called on
European countries to take a stand
against Israel's war against Hamas in
Gaza tahan has dismissed calls from
France Germany and the UK to exercise
restraint amid growing fears of an
imminent Iranian attack on Israel Iran
blames Israel for the killing of hamas's
political Chief at Ismael hania in tan
last month a US battle group sent to the
region is being seen as a warning to
Iran well Dr Cameron Martin lectures on
international relations with a focus on
Iran at the University of susex in the
UK welcome back to DW it's been
something like two weeks since this m
was killed why is Iran taking so long to
take this Revenge that is proclaimed so
loudly that it will
take I think Iranian regime is facing a
massive conundrum on the one hand it
feels obliged to retaliate against
Israel given that um it's been humilated
uh you know Time and Again by Israeli um
army and its um you know um intelligence
uh institutions and so on and in order
to restore its um credibility with his
own uh Regional allies as well as uh to
avoid being seen as Weak by the people
inside Iran it it feels that it has to
respond on the other hand Iranian regime
uh in my view correctly assesses that um
any retaliation carries the risk of a uh
response a joint response by Israel and
the United States and this response
might include destruction of Iran's
nuclear sites as well as its vital
economic infrastructure so um on the one
hand Iran does not want to uh retaliate
in a way that it triggers such a
response on the other hand any response
seems to carry that risk especially in
light of Israel's insistence that it
would immediately respond to any attack
inside Israel so I think Iran is trying
to figure out how to respond without
causing a major war with us and Israel
um and is um probably trying to see
whether uh a potential ceasefire
agreement can remove that necessity from
retaliation and claiming Victory by you
know saying that Iran's stance has
contributed to that fire which helps
Hamas so you think there there is a hope
then there is a possibility then that
this expected retaliation will not
happen because Iran is trying to push is
towards this ceasefire and can claim
some sort of
Victory it's possible in fact Iran's
permanent mission to the United Nations
on Friday issued a statement saying that
Iran's retaliation will be timed and
carried out in a way as to not to risk
uh the cire talks scheduled for this
Thursday so it is possible that Iran for
example ends up attacking certain sites
in neighboring countries in Iraqi
Kurdistan where Iran has previously
claimed to have attacked Israeli related
sites or even in aeran which has close
relations with Israel without itself
directly attacking Israel but I think
this um really depends on the way in
which these scheduled sisire talks
unfold on Thursday and as things stand
uh the prospects are not very bright
because Hamas is claiming that uh Israel
should agree to the May
uh version of the uh proposal which they
had accepted at the time and Hamas may
not even uh participate in this talks on
Thursday in which case Israel would have
a you know um a plausible excuse that
the side which U kind of prevented
ceasefire to to succeed is Hamas and not
Israel right and despite all these
public proclamations uh whether it comes
from um from uh Iran or from isra or
from Hamas or whomever despite all the
shouting in the media do we expect that
quieter backdoor diplomacy with Iran is
already
happening I think diplomacy is happening
but the diplomacy as far as we know from
uh statements made on the western media
is that uh United States messages are
relate to Iran and this messages
basically um you know warn Iran of a
massive retaliation and the you know the
cost of and the consequences of a
potential attack on Israel uh so this
much is for sure happening and then we
had this joint statement by leaders of
France Germany uh and Britain uh asking
Iran to stand down to which you referred
in the beginning uh Iran rejects it and
believes that they have not taken any
stance against Israel's bombardment and
and and operation in Gaza so um beyond
that that I'm not sure what else has
been uh said to Iran Iran is obviously
also Keen uh on seeing who wins the
elections in the US and a democratic
Administration is more likely to strike
a deal over Iran's nuclear uh project so
in that sense we'll leave it there we
we'll have to leave it there but but
thank you for guiding us through that so
clearly uh Dr Martin Dr Cameron Martin
from the University of Sussex in the UK
thank you